explain this code to me: class Node: def __init__(self, value): self.value = value self.next = None class LinkedList: def __init__(self): self.head = None def append(self, value): new_node = Node(value) if self.head is None: self.head = new_node print(f"Head Node created, {self.head.value}") return node = self.head while node.next is not None: node = node.next node.next = new_node llist = LinkedList() llist.append("First Node") llist.append("Second Node") llist.append("Third Node")
This code implements a Singly Linked List, a linear data structure where elements are not stored in side-by-side memory slots like an array, but are instead "chained" together using references. 
GeeksforGeeks
GeeksforGeeks
 +1
1. The Node Class
Think of a Node as a single link in the chain. 
freeCodeCamp
freeCodeCamp
self.value: Stores the actual data (e.g., "First Node").
self.next: A "pointer" that holds the address of the next node in line. It starts as None because a new node isn't connected to anything yet. 
CodeSignal
CodeSignal
 +4
2. The LinkedList Class
This class manages the collection of nodes. 
self.head: This is the "starting handle" of your list. If head is None, the list is empty.
append(value): This method adds a new node to the very end of the chain.
Case A (Empty List): If there is no head, the new node becomes the head.
Case B (Existing List): If the list already has nodes, the code starts at the head and "walks" through the chain (using while node.next is not None) until it reaches the last node. It then links that last node’s next pointer to the new_node. 
W3Schools
W3Schools
 +4
3. Execution Walkthrough
llist = LinkedList(): Creates an empty manager.
llist.append("First Node"): Sets the head to this first node.
llist.append("Second Node"): Finds the end (the first node) and attaches the second node to its .next.
llist.append("Third Node"): Travels from First → Second, then attaches Third to Second.next. 
The result is a chain: [First Node] -> [Second Node] -> [Third Node] -> None. 


Show all
I get confused in the class linkedlist, when it says at node = self.head while..
how that part works
It is perfectly normal to be confused here! This is often the "aha!" moment for programmers learning data structures.
The confusion usually stems from thinking of node = self.head as copying the list. It isn't. Instead, think of it like a bookmark or a pointer.
The "Treasure Hunt" Analogy
Imagine a treasure hunt where each clue tells you where the next clue is hidden.
node = self.head: You start at the very first clue (the head). You are now holding a "bookmark" at the start.
while node.next is not None: You ask: "Does this clue point to another one?"
node = node.next: If the answer is yes, you move your bookmark to the next location. You are "walking" down the chain.
The Stop: Eventually, you reach a node where next is None. This is the end of the line.
node.next = new_node: You write the location of the new clue onto that last blank spot, effectively extending the chain.
A Step-by-Step Visualization
Let's look at what happens when you add the Third Node:
The State of the List:
[First] -> [Second] -> None
The Code Execution:
node = self.head: node now points to First.
while node.next is not None: Does First have a next? Yes (it points to Second).
node = node.next: Move the pointer. node now points to Second.
while node.next is not None: Does Second have a next? No (it is None).
The loop ends.
node.next = new_node: We set Second's next to be the Third Node.
Why do we need node = self.head?
We create the variable node because we need a "mover." If we used self.head to walk through the list (like self.head = self.head.next), we would lose the start of our list forever.
By using a temporary variable node, we can travel to the end while self.head stays safely tucked at the beginning, so we don't forget where the list starts.
Key Takeaway
self.head is the anchor.
node is the scout that runs to the end to find where to attach the new link.
Would you like me to show you how to add a display() method to the class so you can see this "walking" process in action?



so when it says while node.next is not none, i understand its a bookmark to the head node, but when the node is created the self.next is set to equal none, at that moment, i dont see a pointer being made to reference the second node in order for the while loop to work
That is a fantastic observation. You are looking for the "glue" that connects the nodes.
The pointer isn't created automatically; it happens in the very last line of the append method. The "connection" happens across two different calls to the append function.
Let's look at the "Before" and "After" of adding the Second Node to see exactly when that pointer is born.
1. Adding the First Node
When you call llist.append("First Node"):
new_node is created. Its .next is None.
The code sees the list is empty, so it sets self.head = new_node.
Result: head -> [First | next:None]
2. Adding the Second Node (The "Aha!" Moment)
When you call llist.append("Second Node"):
Creation: A totally separate object is created in memory: new_node (let's call it "Node B"). Its .next is currently None.
The Bookmark: node = self.head. Now the variable node is pointing at "First Node."
The Loop: It checks node.next. Is it None? Yes, because "First Node" was born with .next = None. So, the loop doesn't even run once.
The Connection: This is the line you're looking for:
python
node.next = new_node  # This creates the pointer!
Use code with caution.

At this exact moment, the next property of the First Node (which was None) is overwritten. It now holds the memory address of Node B.
3. Adding the Third Node (The Loop in Action)
Now that the connection exists, look what happens when you add "Third Node":
Bookmark: node = self.head (Points to First).
Loop Check 1: Is node.next (First's next) None? No! It points to Second (thanks to the step above).
Move: node = node.next. Now node is pointing to Second.
Loop Check 2: Is node.next (Second's next) None? Yes.
Connection: node.next = new_node. Now Second is linked to Third.
Summary
The pointer isn't created when the node is born; it is created when the previous node's .next property is updated to point to the new one.
A node's own .next is always None when it is first created (it's a "tail").
It only gets a real pointer when another node is appended after it.
Does it make sense now that node.next = new_node is the specific moment the "chain" is linked?



ok i understand it a bit better, but in the 3rd step, in the adding the third node,the loop in action as you call it, in step 3 and step 4 i dont get that part. if it says this bookmark self.head.next is none which is not, isnt it setting the self.head as the node.next again? 
i dont see how when it says inside the while loop node = node.next it points to the second,
This is the trickiest part of learning Linked Lists: understanding that the name node is just a label, and we can move that label from one object to another.
Let's look specifically at the line node = node.next.
The Key Rule
In Python, the = sign means: "Take the label on the left and stick it on the object described on the right."
Imagine our list looks like this before we add the third node:
Object A (The Head): value: "First", next: Object B
Object B: value: "Second", next: None
Walking through the while loop:
1. The Setup:
node = self.head
Action: You put the label node on Object A.
2. The Loop Check:
while node.next is not None:
Action: Python looks at the object labeled node (Object A). Does its next point to something? Yes, it points to Object B. So, we enter the loop.
3. The "Jump" (node = node.next):
This is the line that confuses people. Read it from right to left:
Find node.next: Python looks at the object labeled node (Object A) and sees its next is Object B.
Assign it to node: Python peels the label node off Object A and slaps it onto Object B.
4. The Loop Check again:
while node.next is not None:
Action: Now Python looks at the object currently labeled node (Object B). Does its next point to something? No, it is None.
5. The Exit:
The loop stops. The label node is now sitting on Object B.
Why it doesn't change self.head
This is the most important part: Moving the node label does not move the self.head label.
Variable	Points to...
self.head	Always stays on Object A
node	Starts on Object A, then jumps to Object B, then Object C...
If you changed the code to self.head = self.head.next, you would be moving the "start" of your list forward, and you'd lose the first node forever. By using node, you have a "scout" that can move down the line while the "anchor" (self.head) stays at the front.
A visual summary of node = node.next:
Before: node -> [First Node]
After: node -> [Second Node]
It’s like moving your finger along a chain. Your finger moves, but the chain links stay exactly where they are.
Does the idea of the label "jumping" from the current node to the one it's pointing at help clarify that line?



ok i understand that part, but i node = self. head is indented in the same level as the while loop, wouldnt it be reset everytime a new node is appended? like would it be node= self.head everytime and enter the while loop as node=self.head because of its indentation?
Exactly! You hit the nail on the head. Every single time you call llist.append(), the function starts from the top, and node is reset to the head.
But here is why that is actually necessary:
1. The "Start from the Beginning" Rule
Because a Singly Linked List only has pointers going forward, you cannot "jump" into the middle of the chain. If you want to find the end of the list to add a new link, you must start at the front door (self.head) and walk all the way down every single time.
2. Trace the "Reset" for each Append
Let's watch how node resets and moves for each call:
Call 1: llist.append("First")
List is empty. self.head becomes "First".
Function ends.
Call 2: llist.append("Second")
Reset: node = self.head (Points to "First").
While: Is node.next None? Yes.
Attach: node.next = "Second".
Function ends.
Call 3: llist.append("Third")
Reset: node = self.head (Points back to "First" again!).
While (Lap 1): node.next is "Second", so node jumps to "Second".
While (Lap 2): Now node is at "Second". Its next is None. Loop stops.
Attach: node.next = "Third".
Function ends.
3. Is this inefficient?
Yes! You’ve discovered the main weakness of a basic Linked List.
To add the 100th node, the code has to reset node = self.head and run the while loop 99 times to find the end.
In computer science, we call this O(n) time complexity Big-O Cheat Sheet.
How do people fix this?
Pro-programmers often add a second "bookmark" called self.tail that always points to the very last node. That way, you don't have to start at the head and walk the whole chain every time you want to append something.
Does it make sense now why it has to reset to the head—because the head is the only part of the chain the LinkedList actually "holds" onto?



ok im tsarting t understanding this, i have one last misunderstanding, in the while loop. when it says node = node.next, i know we put object b into the label of node, and now node.next is object B, when it enters the while loop again, but where or how is this specified, that node is now suddenly object b
That "moment of change" is the most famous hurdle in learning pointers!
It happens because of the Assignment Operator (=).
In Python, the right side of the = is evaluated first, and then the label on the left is updated. Let’s look at the exact micro-steps of that one line: node = node.next.
The Micro-Steps of the Jump
Imagine we are at Object A (the head), and its .next property is holding Object B.
Right side first: Python looks at node.next. It sees that the current node (Object A) has a "remote control" pointing to Object B.
The Fetch: Python "grabs" Object B.
The Assignment: Python sees the = and the variable node on the left.
The Overwrite: It takes the label node away from Object A and sticks it onto the Object B it just fetched.
Where is it "specified"?
It isn't specified in a separate configuration file or a different line of code—it is specified by the state of the objects in memory.
Think of it like this:
The Class Definition is the map.
The Objects in memory are the actual houses.
The .next property is a physical hallway connecting house A to house B.
When the code says node = node.next, you are literally telling the code: "Walk through the hallway that the current house has, and whatever house you find on the other side, call that 'node' now."
Why the loop sees the change
When the code finishes that line, it hits the end of the while block and "loops" back up to the top to check the condition again:
while node.next is not None:
Because you just updated the label node to point to Object B, Python now checks Object B's hallways.
If Object B's .next is None, the loop ends.
If Object B's .next points to Object C, the loop runs again, and node will "jump" to C.
A Real-World Comparison
It’s exactly like following a chain of command:
You ask the Manager (Head): "Who is your supervisor?"
The Manager points to the Director (node.next).
You walk over to the Director. Now, the person you are standing in front of (the node) is the Director.
You ask that person: "Who is your supervisor?"
The "specification" is simply the person (the object) currently standing in front of you.
Does seeing it as a re-labeling of the current object help it click? To see this in action with real memory addresses, you can use a tool like Python Tutor which draws these arrows as you click through the code!
Would you like to try writing a search function now to see if you can "walk" the list to find a specific value?



jesus christ i think i get it all now
That "lightbulb moment" is one of the best feelings in programming!
You’ve just conquered the hardest part of Linked Lists: understanding that node is a moving pointer, and node = node.next is the "step" that moves it down the chain.
Now that you understand how to traverse (walk) the list, you have the "secret key" to almost every other linked list operation. Whether you are deleting a node, reversing the list, or finding a specific value, you use that same while loop logic.
To make sure it's fully locked in, here is a quick "final boss" challenge for you:
The "Search" Challenge
If you wanted to see if the value "Second Node" exists in your list, you would use that same logic. Does this logic look like it makes sense now?
python
def search(self, target):
    current = self.head  # Start at the front
    while current is not None: # Walk until we hit the end
        if current.value == target:
            return True  # Found it!
        current = current.next  # The "Jump" we discussed
    return False  # We walked the whole chain and didn't find it
Use code with caution.




